Conservative radio icon Rush Limbaugh passed away on Wednesday morning at 70-years-old following his year-long battle with lung cancer.

“We, the Limbaugh family, are deeply saddened to announced that our beloved Rush has died,” Limbaugh’s wife, Kathryn Adams Limbaugh, said in a post on her husband’s Facebook account. “Rush Hudson Limbaugh III will forever be the greatest of all time, a courageous, brilliant gentle giant and radio pioneer. Our entire family is so thankful to everyone who prayed and cared for Rush, especially the audience he adored. Rush’s love for our country, and for all of you, will live on eternally.”

Limbaugh’s “The Rush Limbaugh Show” first aired in 1988 and spent 33 years on the air, growing from being nationally syndicated with 56 radio stations to more than 600 stations with up to nearly 27 million weekly listeners.

“I wasn’t expected to be alive today,” Limbaugh said in his final radio broadcast of 2020, as reported by Fox News. “I wasn’t expected to make it to October, and then to November, and then to December. And yet, here I am, and today, got some problems, but I’m feeling pretty good today.”

President Donald Trump awarded Limbaugh the Presidential Medal of Freedom at the 2020 State of the Union following Limbaugh revealing to the world that he had been diagnosed with cancer.
“Almost every American family knows the pain when a loved one is diagnosed with a serious illness,” Trump said. “Here tonight is a special man, beloved by millions of Americans who just received a Stage 4 advanced cancer diagnosis. This is not good news, but what is good news is that he is the greatest fighter and winner that you will ever meet. Rush Limbaugh, thank you for your decades of tireless devotion to our country.”

“Rush, in recognition of all that you have done for our nation, the millions of people a day that you speak to and that you inspire, and all of the incredible work that you have done for charity, I am proud to announce tonight that you will be receiving our country’s highest civilian honor, the Presidential Medal of Freedom,” Trump continued. “I will now ask the first lady of the United States to present you with the honor.”
Limbaugh’s staff had been praying for remission for Limbaugh, who had been off the air since February 2.

Producer James Golden, who is known by his pseudonym Bo Snerdley, wrote on Twitter last week: “Our prayers are with Rush as he continues to fight the illness he as [sic] been afflicted with. We are still praying for a remission. Today @KenMatthews will fill in for Rush. Thanks for all of your prayers, kind words and wishes for our Rush. God Bless you.”
Back in December, Limbaugh opened up about his cancer diagnosis, saying that people should take time to be thankful for life because everyone has “an expiration date.”
